CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to the coding guidelines

## Table of Contents

- [Contributing to the coding guidelines](#contributing-to-the-coding-guidelines)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Contribution Workflow](#contribution-workflow)
    - [Note on Chapter Layout](#note-on-chapter-layout)
    - [0) Bring up the idea for discussion](#0-optional-bring-the-idea-up-for-discussion)
    - [1) Submit coding guideline issue](#1-submit-coding-guideline-issue)
      - [1.1) Finding the FLS ID](#11-finding-the-fls-id)
    - [2) Guideline Generated as a Comment](#2-guideline-generated-as-a-comment)
    - [3) Create a Draft with a Member](#3-create-a-draft-with-a-member)
    - [4) Create the PR](#4-create-the-pr)
    - [5) Iterate on Feedback](#5-iterate-on-feedback)
      - [5.1) Member Begins Review](#51-member-begins-review)
      - [5.2) Update the PR Based on Feedback](#52-update-the-pr-based-on-feedback)
    - [6) Contributor Applies Feedback on Issue](#6-contributor-applies-feedback-on-issue)
    - [7) Contributor Applies Regenerated Guideline to PR](#7-contributor-applies-regenerated-guideline-to-pr)
    - [8) Your Guideline gets merged](#8-your-guideline-gets-merged)
    - [You just contributed a coding guideline!](#you-just-contributed-a-coding-guideline)
  - [Reviewer Bot Commands](#reviewer-bot-commands)
    - [Overview](#overview)
    - [Available Commands](#available-commands)
    - [Review Deadlines](#review-deadlines)
    - [Queue Status](#queue-status)
  - [Writing a guideline locally (less typical, not recommended)](#writing-a-guideline-locally-less-typical-not-recommended)
    - [Guideline template](#guideline-template)
  - [Before You Begin Contributing](#before-you-begin-contributing)
    - [Licenses](#licenses)
    - [Code of Conduct](#code-of-conduct)
  - [Contribution Process](#contribution-process)
    - [Issues](#issues)

## Contribution Workflow

Here's a diagram of the overall process:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  Start(["Start"]) --> Idea["Coding Guideline Idea"]
  Idea --> Zulip[/"(Optional)<br>0: Contributor brings <br> to discuss on Zulip"/]
  Zulip --> CreateIssue{{"1: Contributor creates <br> issue"}}
  CreateIssue --> Issue["Coding Guideline Issue"]

  S2{{"2: reStructuredText <br> generated as comment <br> on issue"}} --> Issue
  Issue --> S2

  S3{{"3: Review started by subcommittee member in <= 14 days <br><br> Contributor updates accordingly"}} --> Issue
  Issue --> S3

  Issue --> S4{{"4: Contributor creates a PR using the reStructuredText generated for them on issue"}} --> PR["Coding Guideline<br>Pull Request"]

  S5{{"5: <br> 5.1 PR review started by subcommittee member in <= 14 days <br><br> 5.2 Contributor discusses on PR with members and updates"}} --> PR
  PR --> S5

  PR --> S6{{"(Optional) <br> 6: Contributor applies feedback to issue"}} --> Issue
  Issue --> S7{{"(Optional)<br> 7: Contributor applies updated reStructuredText to Pull request"}} --> PR
  PR --> S8{{"8: Subcommittee member <br> approves & queues;<br>merges to main"}} --> Main[[main]]
  Main --> End(["9: End"])
```

### Note on Chapter Layout

The Safety Critical Rust Coding guidelines has the same chapter layout as the [Ferrocene Language Specification](https://spec.ferrocene.dev/) (FLS). If you would like to contribute a new guideline, find a section from the FLS that interests you, then write a guideline in the corresponding chapter of these coding guidelines.

### 0) (Optional) Bring the idea up for discussion

Have an idea for a coding guideline? Want to discuss it?

If you want to discuss the feasibility of a guideline or discuss it with others to ensure it's not too similar an existing guideline, drop by the [Safety-Critical Rust Consortium's Zulip stream](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/445688-safety-critical-consortium) and open a new topic.

### 1) Submit coding guideline issue

To add a new coding guideline, open a [coding guideline issue](https://github.com/rustfoundation/safety-critical-rust-coding-guidelines/issues/new?template=CODING-GUIDELINE.yml).

#### 1.1) Finding the FLS ID

Note that the FLS ID should be filled according to the FLS paragraph ID for which the guideline is covering. One way to go about finding this is to inspect the page using your web browser. You'll be looking for something like:


```html
<p><span class="spec-paragraph-id" id="fls_4rhjpdu4zfqj">4.1:1</span>
```

You would then pull `fls_4rhjpdu4zfqj` to place in the FLS ID field.


### 2) Guideline Generated as a Comment

A GitHub Action will fire, adding a comment to your newly created issue with
the contents of the coding guideline prepared written out correctly
in reStructuredText.

Note that if you later update the body of the coding guideline issue this will
fire the GitHub Action again and update the original comment with the new
contents converted to reStructuredText.

### 3) Create a Draft with a Member

Within 14 days of your submission, a member of the Coding Guidelines Subcommittee should give you a first review. You'll work with them (and other members) to flesh out the concept and ensure the guideline is well prepared for a Pull Request.

> **Note:** A reviewer is automatically assigned from the pool of Producers using a round-robin system. See [Reviewer Bot Commands](#reviewer-bot-commands) for details.

### 4) Create the PR

> [!NOTE]
> Here's a list of recommended prerequisites that shall be fulfilled before turning an issue into a PR:
>
> * The new rule isn't already covered by another rule
>     * OR, in case there is(are) already another rule(s),
>     * The existing rule(s) need(s) to be linked to the new rule,
>     * AND the new rule needs to link to the existing rule(s).
> * All sections contain some content
> * Content written may be *incomplete*, but must not be *incorrect*
> * `🧪 Code Example Test Results` section shows all example code compiles

As soon as these prerequisites are fulfilled, the draft shall be marked as PR-ready by a subcommittee member, by labeling the issue with `sign-off: create pr`. This denotes that you should create a Pull Request with your Guideline. Further discussion about the amount and correctness of its content shall then be done on the Pull Request itself.

The contents of the PR should be based on the bot comment containing the generated RST form of your guideline, as seen in [Step 2](#2-guideline-generated-as-a-comment). The comment has the exact file content you'll need.

In order to ensure your guideline appears when rendering the document, reference the generated comment from [Step 2](#2-guideline-generated-as-a-comment). All the steps necessary should appear below the headings `📁 Target Location` and `🗂️ Update Chapter Index`.

Make sure to include this command in the body of your PR, where `xyz` is the number of the issue you opened in [Step 1](#1-submit-coding-guideline-issue):

> `closes #xyz`

This will ensure issue `#xyz` is closed when your Pull Request gets merged.


### 5) Iterate on Feedback

#### 5.1) Member Begins Review

The generated Pull Request may attract additional feedback or simply be an easier place to suggest targeted edits.

As the contributor of the coding guideline and opener of the issue, you'll respond to comments, discuss, all the normal things on the pull request.

#### 5.2) Update the PR Based on Feedback

If you agree with the suggested changes, you've got two options:

- Iterate directly on the Pull Request, if you're comfortable with reStructuredText to do so
- If you'd rather make revisions in Markdown, you can return to the issue
  from [1) Submit coding guideline issue](#1-submit-coding-guideline-issue)
  to regenerate the reStructured Text guideline form by following steps
  outlined in
  [6) Contributor Applies Feedback on Issue](#6-contributor-applies-feedback-on-issue)
  and
  [7) Contributor Applies Regenerated Guideline to PR](#7-contributor-applies-regenerated-guideline-to-pr)

### 6) Contributor Applies Feedback on Issue

(Optional, if not comfortable with reStructured Text from
[5.2) Update the PR Based on Feedback](#52-update-the-pr-based-on-feedback))

The contributor edits the body of the issue summary, reflecting suggestions and then saves it.
You will then momentarily see a new comment added to the issue containing the updated
guideline content written in reStructured Text.

### 7) Contributor Applies Regenerated Guideline to PR

(Optional, if not comfortable with reStructured Text from
[5.2) Update the PR Based on Feedback](#52-update-the-pr-based-on-feedback))

The contributor then copy + pastes the contents of the guideline from
[6) Contributor Applies Feedback on Issue](#6-contributor-applies-feedback-on-issue)
and overwrites the contents of their feature branch, so that the feedback is
reflected into the Pull Request.

### 8) Your Guideline gets merged

Once the coding guideline contents have passed review, a subcommittee member will approve the pull request, and put it on the merge queue to be merged.

### You just contributed a coding guideline!

That's it!

---

## Reviewer Bot Commands

### Overview

The reviewer bot (`@guidelines-bot`) automatically assigns reviewers to coding guideline issues and PRs using a round-robin system. Only members marked as "Producer" in the consortium's `subcommittee/coding-guidelines/members.md` are included in the rotation.

The queue state is stored in [Issue #314](https://github.com/rustfoundation/safety-critical-rust-coding-guidelines/issues/314).

### Available Commands

All commands are invoked by mentioning `@guidelines-bot` in a comment:

#### Pass a Review (This Issue Only)

```
@guidelines-bot /pass [optional reason]
```

Use this when you cannot review a specific issue/PR but want to remain in the rotation for future assignments. The next reviewer in the queue will be assigned instead.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /pass Not familiar enough with FFI to review this one
```

#### Step Away from Queue

```
@guidelines-bot /away YYYY-MM-DD [optional reason]
```

Use this to temporarily remove yourself from the reviewer queue until the specified date. You'll be automatically added back when the date arrives. If you're currently assigned to an issue/PR, the next reviewer will be assigned.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /away 2025-02-15 On vacation
```

#### Claim a Review

```
@guidelines-bot /claim
```

Use this to assign yourself as the reviewer for an issue/PR. This removes any existing reviewer assignment. Only Producers can claim reviews.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /claim
```

#### Release Your Assignment

```
@guidelines-bot /release [reason]
```

Use this to release your assignment from an issue/PR without automatically assigning someone else. The issue/PR will be left unassigned. Use `/pass` if you want to automatically assign the next reviewer.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /release Need to focus on other priorities
```

#### Assign a Specific Reviewer

```
@guidelines-bot /r? @username
```

Use this to assign a specific person as the reviewer. This is useful when you know someone has specific expertise relevant to the guideline.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /r? @expert-reviewer
```

#### Request Next Reviewer from Queue

```
@guidelines-bot /r? producers
```

Use this to request the next reviewer from the round-robin queue for an already-open issue or PR. This is useful when:
- An issue/PR was opened without the `coding guideline` label and later labeled
- The original reviewer was removed and you need a new one
- You want to explicitly trigger the round-robin assignment

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /r? producers
```

#### Manage Labels

```
@guidelines-bot /label +label-name    # Add a label
@guidelines-bot /label -label-name    # Remove a label
```

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /label +needs-discussion
@guidelines-bot /label -ready-for-review
```

#### Sync Members

```
@guidelines-bot /sync-members
```

Manually trigger a sync of the reviewer queue with `members.md`. This happens automatically on each workflow run, but you can force it if needed.

#### Check Queue Status

```
@guidelines-bot /queue
```

Shows the current queue position, who's next up for review, and who is currently away.

#### Show Available Commands

```
@guidelines-bot /commands
```

Shows all available bot commands with descriptions.

### Review Deadlines

Reviewers have **14 days** to provide initial feedback on assigned issues or PRs. This timeline helps ensure contributors receive timely responses.

#### What Happens If the Deadline Passes

1. **First 14 days**: The assigned reviewer should provide feedback or take action
2. **After 14 days with no activity**: The bot posts a reminder and the reviewer enters a **14-day transition period** to Observer status
3. **After 28 days total**: If still no activity, the reviewer may be transitioned from Producer to Observer status, and the review is reassigned

#### Acceptable Responses

Life happens! Any of these actions will reset the 14-day clock:

- **Post a review comment** - Any substantive feedback counts
- **Use `/pass [reason]`** - Pass the review to the next person if you can't review it
- **Use `/away YYYY-MM-DD [reason]`** - Step away temporarily (e.g., "On vacation until 2025-02-15")

#### Before You Pass: Consider the Learning Opportunity

Being assigned a review outside your comfort zone can feel daunting, but it's also one of the most effective ways to deepen your Rust knowledge. When you have a concrete goal—understanding *this* guideline about *this* feature—learning becomes focused and sticky in a way that abstract study rarely achieves.

Before reaching for `/pass`, we encourage you to spend about an hour engaging with the unfamiliar material:

- Skim the relevant FLS section and any linked documentation
- Read through the guideline with fresh eyes, noting what *does* make sense
- Search for a blog post or example that illuminates the concept
- Try compiling and tweaking the code examples yourself

You may find that an hour of targeted exploration is enough to provide meaningful feedback, even if you're not an expert. Catching unclear explanations, spotting typos, or asking "what does this term mean?"—these contributions are valuable precisely *because* you're approaching the material without deep familiarity.

That said, `/pass` exists for good reason. If after an honest effort the material remains opaque, or if the guideline requires genuine expertise you don't have (and can't reasonably acquire in an hour), passing to someone better suited is the right call. The goal is thoughtful engagement, not struggling through a review you can't meaningfully contribute to.

#### Examples of Valid Reasons to Pass

- "Not familiar enough with FFI to review this one"
- "On holiday, please assign to someone else"
- "Swamped with other work this week"

The goal is communication, not perfection. If you need to pass or step away, just let us know!

### Queue Status

The queue state is stored in [Issue #314](https://github.com/rustfoundation/safety-critical-rust-coding-guidelines/issues/314) and includes:

- **Current queue position** - Who will be assigned next
- **Active producers** - All reviewers in the rotation
- **Pass-until list** - Who is temporarily away and when they return
- **Recent assignments** - History of the last 20 assignments

---

## Writing a guideline locally (less typical, not recommended)

While it is possible to create guidelines locally, we encourage contributors to make use of the process described above since it handles some of the fiddly details for you as a guideline writer.

### Guideline template

We have a script `./generate_guideline_templates.py` which assumes you're using `uv` that can be run to generate the template for a guideline with properly randomized IDs.

You can the copy and paste this guideline from the command line into the correct chapter.

## Before You Begin Contributing

### Licenses

There is no Contributor License Agreement to sign to contribute this project. 
Your contribution will be covered by the license(s) granted for this 
repository, commonly MIT, Apache, and/or CC-BY, but could be a different 
license. In other words, your contribution will be licensed to the Foundation 
and all downstream users under those licenses. You can read more in the 
Foundation's [intellectual property policy][ip-policy].

### Code of Conduct

Please review and adhere to the [code of conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) before 
contributing any pull requests.

## Contribution Process

All submissions, including submissions by project members, require review. We
use GitHub pull requests for this purpose. Consult [GitHub Help][pull-requests] 
for more information on using pull requests.

### Issues

Do you just want to file an issue for the project? Please do so in GitHub under 
the `Issues` tab.

[ip-policy]: https://foundation.rust-lang.org/policies/intellectual-property-policy/
[pull-requests]: https://help.github.com/articles/about-pull-requests/

Commit message:

docs: clarify round-robin and empty queue behavior

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to the coding guidelines

## Table of Contents

- [Contributing to the coding guidelines](#contributing-to-the-coding-guidelines)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Contribution Workflow](#contribution-workflow)
    - [Note on Chapter Layout](#note-on-chapter-layout)
    - [0) Bring up the idea for discussion](#0-optional-bring-the-idea-up-for-discussion)
    - [1) Submit coding guideline issue](#1-submit-coding-guideline-issue)
      - [1.1) Finding the FLS ID](#11-finding-the-fls-id)
    - [2) Guideline Generated as a Comment](#2-guideline-generated-as-a-comment)
    - [3) Create a Draft with a Member](#3-create-a-draft-with-a-member)
    - [4) Create the PR](#4-create-the-pr)
    - [5) Iterate on Feedback](#5-iterate-on-feedback)
      - [5.1) Member Begins Review](#51-member-begins-review)
      - [5.2) Update the PR Based on Feedback](#52-update-the-pr-based-on-feedback)
    - [6) Contributor Applies Feedback on Issue](#6-contributor-applies-feedback-on-issue)
    - [7) Contributor Applies Regenerated Guideline to PR](#7-contributor-applies-regenerated-guideline-to-pr)
    - [8) Your Guideline gets merged](#8-your-guideline-gets-merged)
    - [You just contributed a coding guideline!](#you-just-contributed-a-coding-guideline)
  - [Reviewer Bot Commands](#reviewer-bot-commands)
    - [Overview](#overview)
    - [Available Commands](#available-commands)
    - [Review Deadlines](#review-deadlines)
    - [Queue Status](#queue-status)
  - [Writing a guideline locally (less typical, not recommended)](#writing-a-guideline-locally-less-typical-not-recommended)
    - [Guideline template](#guideline-template)
  - [Before You Begin Contributing](#before-you-begin-contributing)
    - [Licenses](#licenses)
    - [Code of Conduct](#code-of-conduct)
  - [Contribution Process](#contribution-process)
    - [Issues](#issues)

## Contribution Workflow

Here's a diagram of the overall process:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  Start(["Start"]) --> Idea["Coding Guideline Idea"]
  Idea --> Zulip[/"(Optional)<br>0: Contributor brings <br> to discuss on Zulip"/]
  Zulip --> CreateIssue{{"1: Contributor creates <br> issue"}}
  CreateIssue --> Issue["Coding Guideline Issue"]

  S2{{"2: reStructuredText <br> generated as comment <br> on issue"}} --> Issue
  Issue --> S2

  S3{{"3: Review started by subcommittee member in <= 14 days <br><br> Contributor updates accordingly"}} --> Issue
  Issue --> S3

  Issue --> S4{{"4: Contributor creates a PR using the reStructuredText generated for them on issue"}} --> PR["Coding Guideline<br>Pull Request"]

  S5{{"5: <br> 5.1 PR review started by subcommittee member in <= 14 days <br><br> 5.2 Contributor discusses on PR with members and updates"}} --> PR
  PR --> S5

  PR --> S6{{"(Optional) <br> 6: Contributor applies feedback to issue"}} --> Issue
  Issue --> S7{{"(Optional)<br> 7: Contributor applies updated reStructuredText to Pull request"}} --> PR
  PR --> S8{{"8: Subcommittee member <br> approves & queues;<br>merges to main"}} --> Main[[main]]
  Main --> End(["9: End"])
```

### Note on Chapter Layout

The Safety Critical Rust Coding guidelines has the same chapter layout as the [Ferrocene Language Specification](https://spec.ferrocene.dev/) (FLS). If you would like to contribute a new guideline, find a section from the FLS that interests you, then write a guideline in the corresponding chapter of these coding guidelines.

### 0) (Optional) Bring the idea up for discussion

Have an idea for a coding guideline? Want to discuss it?

If you want to discuss the feasibility of a guideline or discuss it with others to ensure it's not too similar an existing guideline, drop by the [Safety-Critical Rust Consortium's Zulip stream](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/445688-safety-critical-consortium) and open a new topic.

### 1) Submit coding guideline issue

To add a new coding guideline, open a [coding guideline issue](https://github.com/rustfoundation/safety-critical-rust-coding-guidelines/issues/new?template=CODING-GUIDELINE.yml).

#### 1.1) Finding the FLS ID

Note that the FLS ID should be filled according to the FLS paragraph ID for which the guideline is covering. One way to go about finding this is to inspect the page using your web browser. You'll be looking for something like:


```html
<p><span class="spec-paragraph-id" id="fls_4rhjpdu4zfqj">4.1:1</span>
```

You would then pull `fls_4rhjpdu4zfqj` to place in the FLS ID field.


### 2) Guideline Generated as a Comment

A GitHub Action will fire, adding a comment to your newly created issue with
the contents of the coding guideline prepared written out correctly
in reStructuredText.

Note that if you later update the body of the coding guideline issue this will
fire the GitHub Action again and update the original comment with the new
contents converted to reStructuredText.

### 3) Create a Draft with a Member

Within 14 days of your submission, a member of the Coding Guidelines Subcommittee should give you a first review. You'll work with them (and other members) to flesh out the concept and ensure the guideline is well prepared for a Pull Request.

> **Note:** A reviewer is automatically assigned from the pool of Producers using a round-robin system. See [Reviewer Bot Commands](#reviewer-bot-commands) for details.

### 4) Create the PR

> [!NOTE]
> Here's a list of recommended prerequisites that shall be fulfilled before turning an issue into a PR:
>
> * The new rule isn't already covered by another rule
>     * OR, in case there is(are) already another rule(s),
>     * The existing rule(s) need(s) to be linked to the new rule,
>     * AND the new rule needs to link to the existing rule(s).
> * All sections contain some content
> * Content written may be *incomplete*, but must not be *incorrect*
> * `🧪 Code Example Test Results` section shows all example code compiles

As soon as these prerequisites are fulfilled, the draft shall be marked as PR-ready by a subcommittee member, by labeling the issue with `sign-off: create pr`. This denotes that you should create a Pull Request with your Guideline. Further discussion about the amount and correctness of its content shall then be done on the Pull Request itself.

The contents of the PR should be based on the bot comment containing the generated RST form of your guideline, as seen in [Step 2](#2-guideline-generated-as-a-comment). The comment has the exact file content you'll need.

In order to ensure your guideline appears when rendering the document, reference the generated comment from [Step 2](#2-guideline-generated-as-a-comment). All the steps necessary should appear below the headings `📁 Target Location` and `🗂️ Update Chapter Index`.

Make sure to include this command in the body of your PR, where `xyz` is the number of the issue you opened in [Step 1](#1-submit-coding-guideline-issue):

> `closes #xyz`

This will ensure issue `#xyz` is closed when your Pull Request gets merged.


### 5) Iterate on Feedback

#### 5.1) Member Begins Review

The generated Pull Request may attract additional feedback or simply be an easier place to suggest targeted edits.

As the contributor of the coding guideline and opener of the issue, you'll respond to comments, discuss, all the normal things on the pull request.

#### 5.2) Update the PR Based on Feedback

If you agree with the suggested changes, you've got two options:

- Iterate directly on the Pull Request, if you're comfortable with reStructuredText to do so
- If you'd rather make revisions in Markdown, you can return to the issue
  from [1) Submit coding guideline issue](#1-submit-coding-guideline-issue)
  to regenerate the reStructured Text guideline form by following steps
  outlined in
  [6) Contributor Applies Feedback on Issue](#6-contributor-applies-feedback-on-issue)
  and
  [7) Contributor Applies Regenerated Guideline to PR](#7-contributor-applies-regenerated-guideline-to-pr)

### 6) Contributor Applies Feedback on Issue

(Optional, if not comfortable with reStructured Text from
[5.2) Update the PR Based on Feedback](#52-update-the-pr-based-on-feedback))

The contributor edits the body of the issue summary, reflecting suggestions and then saves it.
You will then momentarily see a new comment added to the issue containing the updated
guideline content written in reStructured Text.

### 7) Contributor Applies Regenerated Guideline to PR

(Optional, if not comfortable with reStructured Text from
[5.2) Update the PR Based on Feedback](#52-update-the-pr-based-on-feedback))

The contributor then copy + pastes the contents of the guideline from
[6) Contributor Applies Feedback on Issue](#6-contributor-applies-feedback-on-issue)
and overwrites the contents of their feature branch, so that the feedback is
reflected into the Pull Request.

### 8) Your Guideline gets merged

Once the coding guideline contents have passed review, a subcommittee member will approve the pull request, and put it on the merge queue to be merged.

### You just contributed a coding guideline!

That's it!

---

## Reviewer Bot Commands

### Overview

The reviewer bot (`@guidelines-bot`) automatically assigns reviewers to coding guideline issues and PRs using a round-robin system. Only members marked as "Producer" in the consortium's `subcommittee/coding-guidelines/members.md` are included in the rotation.

The queue state is stored in [Issue #314](https://github.com/rustfoundation/safety-critical-rust-coding-guidelines/issues/314).

Round-robin here means the bot maintains a queue of Producers and a `current_index` cursor. Each assignment takes the next eligible reviewer in queue order and advances the cursor; the queue order does not change, except when `/pass` repositions the reviewer to be next up for future assignments. If no eligible reviewer is available (queue empty or all candidates skipped), the bot leaves the issue or PR unassigned and posts: "No reviewers available in the queue. Please use `@guidelines-bot /sync-members` to update the queue."

### Available Commands

All commands are invoked by mentioning `@guidelines-bot` in a comment:

#### Pass a Review (This Issue Only)

```
@guidelines-bot /pass [optional reason]
```

Use this when you cannot review a specific issue/PR but want to remain in the rotation for future assignments. The next reviewer in the queue will be assigned instead.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /pass Not familiar enough with FFI to review this one
```

#### Step Away from Queue

```
@guidelines-bot /away YYYY-MM-DD [optional reason]
```

Use this to temporarily remove yourself from the reviewer queue until the specified date. You'll be automatically added back when the date arrives. If you're currently assigned to an issue/PR, the next reviewer will be assigned.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /away 2025-02-15 On vacation
```

#### Claim a Review

```
@guidelines-bot /claim
```

Use this to assign yourself as the reviewer for an issue/PR. This removes any existing reviewer assignment. Only Producers can claim reviews.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /claim
```

#### Release Your Assignment

```
@guidelines-bot /release [reason]
```

Use this to release your assignment from an issue/PR without automatically assigning someone else. The issue/PR will be left unassigned. Use `/pass` if you want to automatically assign the next reviewer.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /release Need to focus on other priorities
```

#### Assign a Specific Reviewer

```
@guidelines-bot /r? @username
```

Use this to assign a specific person as the reviewer. This is useful when you know someone has specific expertise relevant to the guideline.

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /r? @expert-reviewer
```

#### Request Next Reviewer from Queue

```
@guidelines-bot /r? producers
```

Use this to request the next reviewer from the round-robin queue for an already-open issue or PR. This is useful when:
- An issue/PR was opened without the `coding guideline` label and later labeled
- The original reviewer was removed and you need a new one
- You want to explicitly trigger the round-robin assignment

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /r? producers
```

#### Manage Labels

```
@guidelines-bot /label +label-name    # Add a label
@guidelines-bot /label -label-name    # Remove a label
```

**Example:**
```
@guidelines-bot /label +needs-discussion
@guidelines-bot /label -ready-for-review
```

#### Sync Members

```
@guidelines-bot /sync-members
```

Manually trigger a sync of the reviewer queue with `members.md`. This happens automatically on each workflow run, but you can force it if needed.

#### Check Queue Status

```
@guidelines-bot /queue
```

Shows the current queue position, who's next up for review, and who is currently away.

#### Show Available Commands

```
@guidelines-bot /commands
```

Shows all available bot commands with descriptions.

### Review Deadlines

Reviewers have **14 days** to provide initial feedback on assigned issues or PRs. This timeline helps ensure contributors receive timely responses.

#### What Happens If the Deadline Passes

1. **First 14 days**: The assigned reviewer should provide feedback or take action
2. **After 14 days with no activity**: The bot posts a reminder and the reviewer enters a **14-day transition period** to Observer status
3. **After 28 days total**: If still no activity, the reviewer may be transitioned from Producer to Observer status, and the review is reassigned

#### Acceptable Responses

Life happens! Any of these actions will reset the 14-day clock:

- **Post a review comment** - Any substantive feedback counts
- **Use `/pass [reason]`** - Pass the review to the next person if you can't review it
- **Use `/away YYYY-MM-DD [reason]`** - Step away temporarily (e.g., "On vacation until 2025-02-15")

#### Before You Pass: Consider the Learning Opportunity

Being assigned a review outside your comfort zone can feel daunting, but it's also one of the most effective ways to deepen your Rust knowledge. When you have a concrete goal—understanding *this* guideline about *this* feature—learning becomes focused and sticky in a way that abstract study rarely achieves.

Before reaching for `/pass`, we encourage you to spend about an hour engaging with the unfamiliar material:

- Skim the relevant FLS section and any linked documentation
- Read through the guideline with fresh eyes, noting what *does* make sense
- Search for a blog post or example that illuminates the concept
- Try compiling and tweaking the code examples yourself

You may find that an hour of targeted exploration is enough to provide meaningful feedback, even if you're not an expert. Catching unclear explanations, spotting typos, or asking "what does this term mean?"—these contributions are valuable precisely *because* you're approaching the material without deep familiarity.

That said, `/pass` exists for good reason. If after an honest effort the material remains opaque, or if the guideline requires genuine expertise you don't have (and can't reasonably acquire in an hour), passing to someone better suited is the right call. The goal is thoughtful engagement, not struggling through a review you can't meaningfully contribute to.

#### Examples of Valid Reasons to Pass

- "Not familiar enough with FFI to review this one"
- "On holiday, please assign to someone else"
- "Swamped with other work this week"

The goal is communication, not perfection. If you need to pass or step away, just let us know!

### Queue Status

The queue state is stored in [Issue #314](https://github.com/rustfoundation/safety-critical-rust-coding-guidelines/issues/314) and includes:

- **Current queue position** - Who will be assigned next
- **Active producers** - All reviewers in the rotation
- **Pass-until list** - Who is temporarily away and when they return
- **Recent assignments** - History of the last 20 assignments

---

## Writing a guideline locally (less typical, not recommended)

While it is possible to create guidelines locally, we encourage contributors to make use of the process described above since it handles some of the fiddly details for you as a guideline writer.

### Guideline template

We have a script `./generate_guideline_templates.py` which assumes you're using `uv` that can be run to generate the template for a guideline with properly randomized IDs.

You can the copy and paste this guideline from the command line into the correct chapter.

## Before You Begin Contributing

### Licenses

There is no Contributor License Agreement to sign to contribute this project. 
Your contribution will be covered by the license(s) granted for this 
repository, commonly MIT, Apache, and/or CC-BY, but could be a different 
license. In other words, your contribution will be licensed to the Foundation 
and all downstream users under those licenses. You can read more in the 
Foundation's [intellectual property policy][ip-policy].

### Code of Conduct

Please review and adhere to the [code of conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) before 
contributing any pull requests.

## Contribution Process

All submissions, including submissions by project members, require review. We
use GitHub pull requests for this purpose. Consult [GitHub Help][pull-requests] 
for more information on using pull requests.

### Issues

Do you just want to file an issue for the project? Please do so in GitHub under 
the `Issues` tab.

[ip-policy]: https://foundation.rust-lang.org/policies/intellectual-property-policy/
[pull-requests]: https://help.github.com/articles/about-pull-requests/
